Hey guys welcome back.
Hey So we're going to do another Q&A session.
Just me and Simon we're going to talk about Section 4 and then we're going to branch off into more general
questions that we just thought were interesting and you guys might find interesting as well.
So Evan you know as a VC you probably seen so many financial models and I'm sure you've seen plenty
of those cliché hockey stick growth models so when are looking at that what makes it believable or not
believable.
Well Simon is referring to when he says hockey stick is the stereotype of a startup is that like it
grows it grows it grows and then it figures something out and it goes a little fast and it goes straight
up.
Right.
And a lot of companies have grown like hockey sticks.
But nowadays it's even rarer but people have kind of come to the stereotype of like they just assume
they have to show hockey stick growth.
Otherwise it's like why would I invest in this.
And then I had to deal with like the function of how venture capital works.
Remember venture capital is based off of betting on home runs not on batting singles and doubles.
I don't care if you accept 50 million.
They only care if you get access in the billions.
So with regards to showing growth it's I think there's two points.
One is yet to be cognizant of your industry right like this is not 2006 and 2007 where anything a venture
capitalist investing in was consumer Web right.
Like we are only investing in like dot com and YouTube and things like that.
And if you're an online business that's purely online selling digital goods then I generally would expect
hockey stick growth because your expenses don't scale in the same way that your user growth does.
You can have a user for zero.
So you know if you if it's on a system that automates that whole thing why wouldn't I see revenue just
go up and to the right as you get something that works more and more.
I mean you are offering a business on the Internet is like the most efficient way you can possibly do
something and that's why so many people are going to software that's why we see software companies go
from zero to a billion in a year a year and a half it's crazy.
So one be cognizant of your industry if you're in software.
Yeah I do expect hockey stick growth.
I expect some very fast rate of growth.
But now nowadays we invest in a lot of different things.
Right.
Like if you're a food delivery business or you're doing something with farms are you doing something
with energy.
These are all venture capital targets now.
And if that's the case.
No don't show hockey stick like that doesn't make any sense.
Like if you're building cars you're going to grow the hockey stick rate because every time you build
a new car you need a new employee and you can't scale that quickly.
You can't just wake up one day and be like Wow we grew by a factor of 10.
It just you can't structurally grow that fast so if you show me up into the right and you're hurtin
food or some of the things that are sexy now like hardware or physical product businesses and you showing
that I'm just going to say like no B.S. and most people are going to say you don't understand your industry
well enough.
And the other point I was going to say is that like we say hockey stick and you go up the right.
Like huge growth you know technically that's just a function of the scale of the graph.
Right.
So like if I'm looking at a graph and let's say you have really lame growth like it's like really and
moving up to the right and that's you see that on a 10 year scale Well what happens when you zoom out
to 40 years or 50 years.
Well guess what it's going to look like a hockey stick.
It's always going to look like that.
So that's one thing to keep in mind like don't get stuck on this design in any situation if you zoom
out enough.
It's always going to look like that.
It's just some businesses you know will take eight years to get to a significant amount of growth and
some take two.
So just be aware of that don't get stuck on.
I have to show extreme growth very quickly because it's all just a matter of the timeframe you're looking
at.
So we covered user attrition rate and attrition is kind of a generic term for you lose customers.
In SAS we call it churn churn is like what 100 people subscribe.
And at the end of the month 20 people drop out cancel our subscription that's 20 percent churn churn
is like a number that if you're in SAS you live and die by it.
What do you see people do incorrectly the most or most commonly when they're trying to model up their
attrition.
One of the things that I see if you make a mistake with churn or attrition in the beginning especially
with the models is they assume that whatever they're using is going to be accurate for their projection
you know whether even if they had a period of time where they have some users maybe they have launched
it in like a private beta and got some got some some data to base it on.
A lot of times it can be very different.
Their actual attrition can be very different so it's something that you definitely want to track very
closely rather than use and assume that you know whatever you have is correct.
Yeah.
And as I say one thing I've seen is people are too optimistic with their attrition and what they'll
do is they'll say like you talked to the beta group right.
Like a lot of people use their beta statistics and that's not a great way of modeling out the long term.
But people do the opposite where they'll be like my beta attrition was 10 percent.
OK.
But then I know that we're going to release V-1 in June and the ones to be so much better that our attrition
is going to 4 percent.
And V-2 is going to be like the best thing ever made.
We're going to be competing with like slack and Skype and attrition going 1 percent.
And like it's just not true it's just told don't do that.
You don't know what your product is going to look like.
You don't know your launch date.
And just by saying that at least for a venture capital perspective just by saying that you know definitively
what your attrition is going to be that makes me think that you don't know what you're talking about
because no one can know that stuff.
So with attrition I generally prefer to see people being pessimistic because I see a model where you
have significant attrition and it doesn't just go away magically and your numbers still make sense and
you still grow then that's a very good indication.
All right.
And second another question for you.
What if someone is in between two different revenue models like completely different revenue models.
And you know they're not sure which one that they're going to go with how should they think about it
in terms of their financial model.
Yeah Ira that you might not agree with this but I mean I don't see the problem in modeling too.
So you know do you think are going to be subscription anything going to be one time upfront sale like
a license then model both of them.
I mean it takes an extra hour hour and a half you know.
And the reason also I say that is because if you do both oftentimes you'll answer the question for for
yourself.
You know you were like I don't know if I want subscription or or a one time purchase.
Well it's a hard decision just sitting here right now and the time it is now we can't see the future.
But if the model both of those out you might actually see that one is clearly better than the other
and it's way easier to understand and it makes sense with how your product is structured.
If you guys skip ahead to the case study really went over my startup called scholar Pro we were looking
at our model that we use to raise our second round of capital.
We switched our model over and over and over again because we just didn't know which one we thought
made the most sense.
And it wasn't really actually till after we made that model that we modeled out everything we looked
at like what if everyone pays us yearly What if everyone pays us monthly and then what if like the schools
visit makes us just watched the case study what are the schools pay for the users instead.
Well once we model that out we're like wow.
Users are schools paying for the users is extremely slow growth.
It's extremely unrealistic to think they're going to go fast with that yearly doesn't make any sense.
That was another thing we found is just like we model it out we're like that just doesn't it doesn't
make sense with the product we're offering is and so we ended up with the monthly one which is by far
the best.
Now I completely agree and I think you know you should definitely model both of them out just don't
do it at the same time do one and then do the next read out right away so you can look at both.
All right.
So have you ever seen a situation bringing this up because it occurred to me recently where you saw
business make a business decision based purely off of how that decision will affect their model and
not their actual business revenue profit the general health of the business.
I'll give you example.
We're working on this thing called Evins perks.
Right.
And if you guys are watching this like a month from now you'll know what I'm talking about.
But what it is is I'm going to companies and saying hey I have 110000 students.
Why don't you give us an exclusive discount for my students and then I'll incentivize them to try out
your service.
Right because software is inexpensive right but if you give me three months free well then yeah I'll
try it out.
And what I found is some people will say no.
And again I should preface this.
The reason why this is kind of ridiculous is that like we're only talking about SAS companies.
So I'm going to a company like Kanva or a company like into it with their quick books like their online
subscription cookbooks or zero dot com or like spy fu or ACM rush all these companies kiss metrics though.
And for them to add another user cost them literally nothing like it's just 0 0 0 0 0 1 if anything.
So me saying Give us a discount and I'll give it to 100000 students.
It should be free money right.
Because for them it does.
It's going to cost them anything to offer this for free to let these students dip their toes in the
water.
What I found is people are saying no not because they don't they hate money but because what's going
to do is it's going to ruin their metrics for when they go and try to fundraise.
Right.
So if I'm trying to model the revenue growth reduce source modeling.
Right so you going to say well the revenue from this group of people that I got from Facebook ads is
probably to look like this right because Facebook adds 50 percent of people are going to sign up.
OK well if I sponsor events what's it going to look like.
Well it's you know 40 percent are going to sign up.
Well they're saying no because they say like well what if your source only 10 percent of people sign
up.
And then one ends up having it.
What ends up happening is I have to merge those three together making my 45 percent Sign-Up look more
like 20 something and that's going to make my business look less aesthetic in general when I then joke
try to fundraise.
It's really bizarre.
Like they're literally saying no to free money because it's going to make their model look less perfect
when they try to raise money.
Yeah it just I don't know I can't believe it's blows my mind but have you ever seen anything like that.
No I'm not that I can think of.
That's a great example.
Yeah.
I'm still trying to wrap my head around it.
Yeah and there's really nothing from like a sales standpoint you can like argue with that like I don't
I don't know what our subscription rates are going to be so mad.
Good luck with your fund raise I guess.
Like it just seems to me that profit and revenue are at the end of the day are more important what should
I have had was.
What are any like techniques you see people use to effectively cook their books and their financial
models.
So when you make a financial model you're trying to be as honest as possible.
But if you're working with yourself or your team or is trying to raise money or are trying to get acquired.
Have you seen anybody use common techniques to make it look rosier than it really is.
Yeah.
You know I think one technique is for people to keep two different models one for their own use and
then one for presentation to the outside world.
And you know when you're presenting a motto usually like if you're presenting it to investors you're
not going to walk them through the inner workings of your model and give them a peek under the hood
they're not going to be interested in that anyways.
They're going to be interested in your assumptions and then they want to see your results.
So what happens then is underneath the hood is a lot of opportunities to fudge things.
If somebody wanted to I guess I'd push back a little bit on the whole like having books for yourself
and then books for external viewing.
Just because we exist kind of in an environment where investors at least from venture capital standpoint
are just unrealistic like it's ridiculous some of the things that they expect to see.
And it's a function of how screwed up venture capital is like we only look for Facebook's and group
bonds but we'll totally pass over a business that totally makes sense but can only make $50 billion
or 100 million dollars.
So it kind of makes sense that like on an internal level as an operator there are certain assumptions
that I care about that an investor wouldn't care about.
But then also like it makes more sense for me to be pessimistic in my internal models because that's
easier to operate with just assuming my attrition is going to be higher assuming problems are going
to happen whereas if we're being truly honest it's not necessarily realistic.
And we're doing yourself a disservice by using that as our external model.
Obviously I think other people might disagree.
You kind of have to make decision when you get to it.
But one thing I was going to say is and venture capital especially one thing I've seen people do to
to cook their models is they take all the things that are not explained on the sheet and they mess with
those.
Right.
So one of the things we care about is how big is your addressable market.
Your decimal market could be $100 million.
It could be a million dollars.
It could be a billion.
Well oftentimes what they'll do is in their models will say in the first five years we're in a good
20 percent market penetration.
20 percent market penetration of million dollar market is $20 million of a billion it's 200 million.
And of a million to 200000 there's a tolerably different number.
Well what they'll do is they'll just feed in that number as an assumption they'll be like oh yeah our
markets totally 2 billion.
And if I'm just looking at the model I'm not going to notice that like I'm not going to notice that
you just assume your total dressup market's huge because that's usually a calculation you do on the
side or you do and your paycheck.
So I've seen that a lot.
People will be like you our markets 10 times larger than it really is because in a model it's not really
obvious that that's what they've done.
That makes sense.
Evan often you see VBA used in financial models like is it overkill.
I think generally especially for startups and entrepreneurs is it's overkill.
You can do so many things without having to ever touch VBA unless you know maybe maybe you want to build
a flight simulator in Microsoft Excel.
You might want to look at that.
VBA is visual basic.
What's the A.
I don't even know.
So basically excel you know it's like cheats so excels but you can run calculations and do really basic
programming in the back end.
So with VBA I've seen one thing I've seen that's really useful is that people will build in actual data
into their model so they're not manually updating all the time.
Right so like if I get 10 new customers and my software I can totally feed that number into a database
somewhere and into my Excel sheets don't keep updating it and it's pretty cool because you share with
someone and they see it moving in real real time.
That's pretty cool.
But generally yeah VBA is pretty excessive.
I don't think it helps you answer questions that you otherwise wouldn't have.
It might make you more accurate but then the question is like does it make you two percent more accurate
to 2 percent matter.
Yeah I think it's generally overkill unless you have an interest in exploring it.
There's a concept in lean startups called the one metric that matters.
And if you guys there might be course we talked about this.
There's a lot of companies around nowadays that have this paradigm of like when we grow our company
it doesn't make sense to track 16 different things and focus on gross margins.
Our total a day over day increase in revenue and all these other metrics you can collect.
They only care about one singular metric at a time.
So that's why it's called One metric that matters.
So if I'm at a software company that does subscriptions like a SAS company we might say look we look
at our revenue growth and say you know the only thing that matters is how many people sign on to the
Pro Plan to the enterprise plan.
We might say only it matters is our churn rate how many people fall out the bottom because of returns
low enough will always grow.
Is that something you've seen people build into their models and if you haven't.
Is it something you think is a good idea or is it or is it just kind of to I.
I think that that concept is more about trend like post-launch and tracking the progress that you're
making.
And you know that that makes sense to me in terms of like the modeling itself.
You could still look at that metric of where you know maybe set it as a target of where you want to
get to and then back everything else calculate everything and derive everything else from that where
you know if churn is the biggest thing you know even then you can look at OK well what is the maximum
churn that we can have during the growth period that we want to have and then based on that what would
then what with our revenues look like then what would our expenses look like where would our profits
look like you know everything else becomes secondary as it makes sense.
I guess what you choose to optimize really doesn't necessarily reflect itself on the financial model
but yeah you can build it the model around the thing that matters most.
Question for you how married to your model do you think you should be like Is this a rough guideline
like you just did as an exercise and you should never check it again.
On the other side of spectrum is it not only a financial model.
It's like a benchmarking tool for your organization because I know people who I sort of got they don't
even talk to their customers they just stare at their model all day long and they're like well I've
projected 10 percent growth next month.
So once I hit 10 percent growth next month I'm done for the month.
I've seen people who build it like it's like their bible they have to follow every single stage of it.
Now like people that follow the Bible do that anyway.
But is that a problem or are people just looking way too much into the model and using it kind of as
an excuse to get away from the more subjective aspects of their business.
You know I think there's a agree with you I think there's definitely a risk there and I've seen a lot
of entrepreneurs do this sometimes once they get into creating a model they can just get a little too
crazy about it and they get absorbed with the model itself more than actually building their business.
And that's where there's can be a real danger there.
And I think you got it when you build your model you get to decide what that model's purpose is for.
So if you're building it to raise funding then you build it and if you're successful at raising funding
you may not have to look at that motto again.
You achieve your goal with that but if you're building it as a rough guide to benchmark yourself to
see aright.
You know I'm going to look at whether we can hit that target in three months and in three months you
see how you're doing against what you thought it was then you could make.
You can adjust your benchmarks afterwards and you have a different purpose for your model there.
The other mix on one question I've been asked and this is just what I want to touch on really quickly
was at what point in time in your business does your CFO or your CEO or someone else other than you
the business owner founder take over your model.
You know because the thing is I've seen situations where there's founders and they had 200 people in
their company and they're still the ones who go into Google sheets and update their model every time
something changes.
So the question is look when is a good time to hand that off generally.
You know I see financial modeling as a from a Founders perspective as important up until the point where
you literally have someone who's in charge of numbers and projections and things like that because unless
you are just a finance person and that makes you feel better about it you're really kind of doing organization
a disservice if you have someone who is in charge of money and projections and time and all that stuff
and you don't let them put that into their in their wheel house or into their sandbox or whatever.
Whatever it is that they work on.
So yeah I think you're doing a disservice at that point.
But in general I generally see it happen.
You know when you when you have someone who's in charge of finances which usually does not happen until
your second round of funding or maybe even your third and I also see people you know when they see companies
that after they're done fundraising they don't really keep a model anymore which is a little nuts because
later you going to make it anyway when you get bought or axid or whatever.
But yeah I mean generally that's when I think your baby leaves home and goes to college probably around
like the second and second and third fund raise during that.
No not really.
I think you hit on all the good points.
Last question.
It's the concept of inflection points.
Right so we're talking about growth revenue go through the growth.
What an inflection point is if you aren't familiar is when you say you have a chart or a process or
something and it goes in a fairly predictable pattern or line and at some certain point you pass a tipping
point where something changes and the fundamental dynamics of that process change right.
So that's what we call an inflection point.
You can inflect down or inflect up.
So for instance manufacturing.
Right.
What's an inflection point manufacturing.
Well there are inflection points all throughout the process if I make $10 right it might cost me $10
per dollar until I make a hundred.
At which point they're going to cost five.
When I make a thousand they're going to cost me $2.
And when I make a million they're going to cost me 40 cents.
Right so every time I pass that threshold I have an inflection point.
All of a sudden my expenses change but also user demand and user growth and also profit changes.
My question is do you ever see people do that where in their user growth they literally like Mark out
sections and say this is this you know our user growth is going to totally change here because something
changes or is that too much or is that something that we're on the flip side.
Is that something you generally expect people to put in because it's shows that they understand their
business.
That one is tough because they're kind of seen in both ways where some entrepreneurs you know you just
it's too hard to predict so then they kind of just Mahto out the grove to the best of their ability
where they don't pick out specific inflection points.
But you know I I haven't seen that many people actually try to pick out the timing of the inflection
points because it seems like that's that would be a pretty tough call to make.
Yeah I mean in the case study we did with my startup we had inflection points built into it but that
was because we are assuming we had this base promotion model where we would sign on big groups of people
who would then promote it so we'd see spikes and now we assumed like at first we'll be able to get one
of these every four months.
And then as we grow in general we get more sales people are more business development and so that could
shorten down to 2 and Jordan down one.
And that's why we saw this kind of like move Spike move Spike move Spike kind of thing.
So yeah I kind of agree with that like I've seen it go both ways.
If you do it and you do it wrong you kind of screw up the model in terms of your clarity of understanding.
Right so a lot of times you're doing a model so you can better understand it you can better communicate
how your business operates and the functional help of it to someone else.
So if you do too much of that and you're not 100 percent sure why you're doing it or you're not a hundred
percent confident it's true or accurate you're actually kind of doing yourself a disservice.
However I would be remiss if I was investing in a physical product business that did not understand
that there are very common thresholds at which your unit costs go down which means that you could potentially
lower your costs and then on the flip side.
Yeah there are always inflection points in advertising and growth I mean for instance let's say we use
Facebook ads.
Right.
Well we can figure out how much it costs for a Facebook ad and we can figure out how many customers
we can get from that.
But once you start spending ten thousand dollars a month then you can start using things like our brain
like our brain is this advertising network that shows those fake articles basically at the bottom of
articles.
That's going to be a totally different market and you couldn't have gotten to that yet until you got
to a certain amount of users or a certain amount of money.
And there's a lot of advertising examples you could find where these networks are not going to be open
to you until you get to a certain size or growth at which point it will definitely change your trajectory.
So yeah I definitely probably say it's it's both like I would expect you to get the obvious ones.
And you know if you're in manufacturing and you don't know that your costs change they're not the problem.
But at the same time just don't go crazy with it I mean you could you could do this to death and you
just have the most confusing model ever made.
Yeah and I totally agree.
I think what I'm saying was you don't you don't manually put in these inflection points right as you
kind of model your business model.
You know if you have a point where you're saying we're going to be doing this up to this point and then
at this point we're going to be using the funding to do a totally different marketing push that's going
to do this.
The influx I'm going to come out from modeling those decisions make sense.
OK guys if you have questions like usual posted in the slack or the Q&A you know let us know what you
thought.
Let us know if there's something you want to elaborate on or you is any questions we missed.
Otherwise we'll see in the next section.